---
title: 50 / 30 / 20 Rule
date: 2025-07-14 7:00:00 -0400
categories: [Planning]
tags: [budgeting]
published: true
description: I recently saw the 50/30/20 rule pass on socials and decided to take a closer look
toc: true
---

## Explained
Apparently the 50/30/20 rule is one of the simplest and most popular budgeting strategies out there. As it’s easy to remember, flexible, and helps build a solid foundation for managing your money. Now I'd have to say that anything that encourages budgeting or even the thought of budgeting would be a huge win for most people.

Specifically this rule states:
- **50% Needs** – These are your essentials: rent or mortgage, groceries, utilities, transportation, insurance, minimum debt payments.
- **30% Wants**– Think dining out, subscriptions, travel, hobbies, or anything fun but non-essential.
- **20% Savings & Debt Repayment** – This includes emergency savings, retirement contributions, extra debt payments, or investing.

Right off the bat I like the 20% savings and debt repayment, but, I would say half of that should be invested for the long term. Once your bad debt is paid off and you have a nice little emergency fund hopefully all 20% will be invested for the long term.

## Benefits
This strategy is incredibly simple to follow and has you saving just enough to be setup for success in the future. Potentially one of the better entry points into the word of budgeting.

## When the Rule may not work
1. You're Paying Off Debt Aggressively
- If you’re trying to crush credit card debt, you might shift your breakdown to 50/20/30 — or even 50/10/40 — putting more toward extra payments and less toward lifestyle spending. Student debt may also qualify depending on the source. Personally I still have some OSAP and right now with the interest break and tax deduction there is little need to do more than the minimum payment in my opinion

2. If you're cost of living is too high. I definitely fell into this category starting out in Toronto I remember putting $50-100 away just to build the habit and the rest was necessities with very little wants

3. You're Saving for Something Big
Trying to buy a home, start a business, or take a sabbatical? You might push savings to 30% or more and live more frugally in other areas. Another qualifier in this category would be for early retirement (FIRE)

4. Your Income Is Extremely Low (or High)
Piggy backing off of #2 if you're barely covering the basics, sticking to 20% savings may not be realistic yet and that's okay. Conversely, high earners might not need 30% of their income for “wants” and can save or invest more. Since both my wife and I work and contribute towards our necessities together I generally aim for 30% savings rate. I can also achieve this because I keep my wants extremely low like less than 10% if I were to guess

## Summary
The 50/30/20 rule isn’t a rigid formula, it’s a helpful starting point. Think of it like training wheels for your financial journey: it gives you structure, balance, and a sense of control when you’re just getting started. But as your life evolves, so should your approach.
the real goal isn’t to follow some perfect percentage split, it’s to make sure your money is working for you. Financial success comes from awareness and intention, not perfection. So use the 50/30/20 rule as a guidepost and not a finish line.


That's all folks thank you for reading, next week we'll review Q2 and do the 6 month check in!

You can support me by:
- [Subscribing to my YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@FinancialFreedomAnOdyssey?sub_confirmation=1)
- [Using my WealthSimple referral link](https://my.wealthsimple.com/app/public/trade-referral-signup?code=VUGTXQ)
- Simply continuing to read my weekly posts here.

Cheers ☕
